---
title: "Full-Spectrum Neuronal Diversity and Stereotypy through Whole Brain Morphometry"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Full_Spectrum
excerpt: 'We conducted a large-scale study of whole-brain morphometry, analyzing 3.7 peta-voxels of mouse brain images at the single-cell resolution, producing one of the largest multi-morphometry databases of mammalian brains to date.'
date: 2023-07-24
venue: 'Research Square (Under Review)'
paperurl: 'http://sd-jiang.github.io/files/Full_Spectrum.pdf'
citation: 'Liu, Y., Jiang, S., Li, Y., Zhao, S., Yun, Z., Zhao, Z. H., ... & Peng, H. (2023). Full-Spectrum Neuronal Diversity and Stereotypy through Whole Brain Morphometry. Research Square.'
---
## Abstract:
We conducted a large-scale study of whole-brain morphometry, analyzing 3.7 peta-voxels of mouse brain images at the single-cell resolution, producing one of the largest multi-morphometry databases of mammalian brains to date. We spatially registered 205 mouse brains and associated data from six Brain Initiative Cell Census Network (BICCN) data sources covering three major imaging modalities from five collaborative projects to the Allen Common Coordinate Framework (CCF) atlas, annotated 3D locations of cell bodies of 227,581 neurons, modeled 15,441 dendritic microenvironments, characterized the full morphology of 1,891 neurons along with their axonal motifs, and detected 2.58 million putative synaptic boutons. Our analysis covers six levels of information related to neuronal populations, dendritic microenvironments, single-cell full morphology, sub-neuronal dendritic and axonal arborization, axonal boutons, and structural motifs, along with a quantitative characterization of the diversity and stereotypy of patterns at each level. We identified 16 modules consisting of highly intercorrelated brain regions in 13 functional brain areas corresponding to 314 anatomical regions in CCF. Our analysis revealed the dendritic microenvironment as a powerful method for delineating brain regions of cell types and potential subtypes. We also found that full neuronal morphologies can be categorized into four distinct classes based on spatially tuned morphological features, with substantial cross-areal diversity in apical dendrites, basal dendrites, and axonal arbors, along with quantified stereotypy within cortical, thalamic and striatal regions. The lamination of somas was found to be more effective in differentiating neuron arbors within the cortex. Further analysis of diverging and converging projections of individual neurons in 25 regions throughout the brain reveals branching preferences in the brain-wide and local distributions of axonal boutons. Overall, our study provides a comprehensive description of key anatomical structures of neurons and their types, covering a wide range of scales and features, and contributes to our understanding of neuronal diversity and its function in the mammalian brain.

[Get detail](http://sd-jiang.github.io/files/Full_Spectrum.pdf)
